Canals, right. I've never talked to him, but I'm
going to next time I'm on the East Coast. Oh, you
certainly should, because Johnny's got some
interesting things to say, because, oh boy.
My memory's failing me here. But he was in and out of
Washington, I think, in uniform, I believe. Yes.
In ONR and so on. And then... at Scripps and then
went back to Rhode Island, but he's been very
active in the kind of political aspects of these
things and so on, and you certainly ought to have a
talk with
him. research vessels. Obviously, you don't have
any when you come here. What do you do? How do you go
about it? What kind do you try to choose? What do you
want your undergraduates to have? Just tell me
about it. Well, here we were influenced a good deal
by also local tradition and so on. And when I
arrived here in 51, the department under
primarily under Dr. Barnes's I think impetus had
obtained through sort of government surplus a
small vessel that had been originally built by the
Bureau of Commercial Fisheries. She was about 115
feet long, wood hull, and had been designed not as a
fishing vessel, but essentially as a small kind of
passenger and freight vessel to take care of
supplying fisheries
programs up in Alaska and so on. She had an
interesting sort of characteristic that she
could, although she was a small vessel, she could
accommodate quite a large number of passengers
and had a large hold which in effect we were able to
convert to a sort of laboratory. She was not didn't
have a great deal of deck space and so on. But this
vessel had been procured and it required a certain
amount of conversion as they always do and also the
installation of necessary winches and so on. We
used this, what was in a sense a very small type
vessel up until we obtained the the Thompson,
which is one of these Agars, in about 1965 or 66. So
we used Brown Bear for about 15 years, and not only
for local work inside Puget Sound and so on and off
the coast, but we took her out into the North
Pacific, not, but she was range limited as well as
sort of size limited, and so it was sort of the Gulf
of Alaska and so on, but out along the Aleutian
chain, and in 1964, and I'm sorry,
must be 1959, 1960,
we actually took her north up into the Bering Sea
and actually into the Arctic. So we stretched her
capabilities just about as much as and maybe
beyond sort of reasonable limits, but she proved
to be a very kind of efficient vessel in that she
could be operated with a fairly small crew and so
on, and we thought we got a lot of good work out of
her. When she was replaced by the T.G. Thompson, we
were clearly sort of vessel limited, but we ended
up with a real sort of problem here in the fact that
We were really rather reluctant to take on one of
these AGARs, but had been told repeatedly by ONR
and NSF that the vessel would be completely
funded, because it was almost an ordered
magnitude jump here in the cost of operations and
so on. So we finally did. And of course, we no sooner
had delivery of the ship than they said they
couldn't.
has really been fighting ever since to, in a sense,
get adequate vessels, operation support for the
vessel. And one thing we did not get involved in,
and it was done intentionally,
It may be hard to tell whether we were right or
wrong, but we never got involved in anything like
the Indian Ocean Expedition or even going back
prior to that to the IGY of using this as a mechanism
in a sense to expand the fleet and so on, which was
clearly done, I think, at some of the
institutions. They used these sort of major
national efforts to increase the size of their
fleet, but we've never felt we had quite the same,
or I never felt, maybe I should say, and I know some
of the faculty would agree with me, that we should
try and do the same kind of things as Scripps and
Woods Hole did, but we had our own destiny to try and
work out here, which didn't necessarily involve
the very extensive seagoing cruises. Did you
expect all your undergraduates to work on the
vessel out at sea? Oh,
I think I would have said yes if you go back to the
early 50s or something, but
we got very much caught up with this. the Sputnik
era here, with increased interest in science and
so on. And certainly the ocean became a very
romantic sort of an area of study. And so our
undergraduate program shot up at a rate that I
don't think we would ever have sort of predicted.
And we were, our undergraduate enrollment in
oceanography was increasing about 25 percent a
year, which means it doubled every three years.
And we went from one student or something in 1952,
and we were up to I think over 800 in,
well, the early 60s, I guess it was. And, I mean, it
was clearly obvious you couldn't do the kind of
things that we'd originally had in mind, which, as
I think I mentioned earlier, a really sort of
practical preparation of sea work and so forth.
And it got to a point that we couldn't even give
laboratories
with our formal courses because we didn't have the
capacity to handle this number of students. So
even the kind of laboratory work clearly sort of
suffered under this expansion. It was very
exciting, but
I think probably went too far. Now, I don't know
what the later, what's happening in the last year
or two, but it's dropped down considerably, the
undergraduate enrollment, but it in a sense got
over-inflated here, but not really due to our
recruiting efforts or anything, but just because
of general popular interest in the field. And
we've done a lot of things other than just the sort
of formal undergraduate
and graduate training here, in that
it started back in the days where I really felt we
did need to provide some input of students and so
on, which involved working with high school
teachers and so on. I ran summer institutes for for
high school teachers for a number of years here,
with the idea that, you know, they'd encourage
some of their students to come into the field. I've
been involved in the writing of two high school
level textbooks, and so we did that, and one of the
things which had started before the war was a
general sort of introductory oceanography
course, which still carries the number of
Oceanography 101, which was in no way intended for
our own majors, but a science orientation course.
And most of the students who take it are not even
science students, but humanities and social
science students. We were teaching, that's a
five-credit course, and a few years ago at least,
we were teaching that to over 1,500 students a
year. We build up, certainly. I must have some sort
of general public awareness of the field, at
least. And I think these are, these are worthwhile
things. They're not just for sort of promotional,
but anybody living around here, I think, ought to
know a little bit about what the ocean is like. And
so that's still going on. When you started to
outfit these early vessels, did you have a
professional captain do so? Something like James
Fawn, I'm thinking of, or did you try to do it within
your department? No, we started out in a sort of
small way here, and the first man we had who was
skipper of, he'd been a skipper of an even smaller
vessel before the Brown Bear, had no sort of formal
training as an officer. He had been a fisherman
primarily, and a small boat operator type person,
and came in and kind of learned the job as he went
along. He was a marvelous individual, and Frank
Princehouse, and very much interested in the in
the what we were trying to do and extremely
cooperative and very good at sort of taking care of
the vessel and the crew and so on we actually had to
see that he got the opportunity to get some sort of
special training and so on when the Thompson came
along because otherwise he couldn't have been
captain on the Thompson unfortunately he shortly
after we got the Thompson he developed a serious
ailment and since died, but he was captain on her
for about a year or so. And then we went to these
Morris out of professionally trained officers,
and I think the man that's captain now is the
Thompson that came to us from Scripps, having been
on one of their ships. So there's been a switch
there, but it's partly related, again, just to the
size of the vessels and the kind of Coast Guard
regulations about the types of officers that you
have to have on board.
When you first come to Washington, the funding for
oceanography and oceanographic departments was
sort of a block funding. That is that- When I came
out here. When you came out here. Yes. Is that ONR
and so forth would get sort of a block funding to a
university, which has moved recently to sort of
special project fundings. What sort of feeling do
you have about that as it affects the way you try to
work your department? Well, of course, I've been
out of this for about ten years. I just think it's
been a very unfortunate sort of trend, and I keep
hoping I can see some sign that's going to reverse
itself, but I don't think I have been able to see
anything so far. Yes, although in a sense, in terms
of the total dollars, they were small now compared
to what's being
transferred these days. Nevertheless, they were
relatively large amounts, and in the first few
years when essentially all our support came from
ONR, it almost used to be done by letter. they'd
send us a letter saying, what do you want to do? And
we'd write a letter back saying, we think it'd be
fun to do so. And they'd say, well, we think we can
give you X thousand dollars next year. And why
don't you write a request for that? And we'd write
another letter saying, we'd like to have so much
for next year. And that was it. But since then, it
has gone progressively towards more agencies
involved, which in a way, is life insurance, I
think, from our point of view, because not all of
them go up and down at the same time. So it gives you
some sort of security in that way. But the fact that
the projects have and down and down until you get
the situation which I feel prevails today where
money is not allocated really to, although
legally it comes to the university and to the
department, it's based on these individual sort
of proposals. and what people do is start talking
about my money and my ship time and so forth.
I think that from an administrative point of view,
it's essentially an intolerable situation and
that the chairman of the department has no way of
administering All he's doing is trying to fit
together all these little bits and pieces, and he
has no way of fitting things together in most
cases, and saying, okay, you two fellows get
together and use the ship jointly or something.
They both say, well, I got my money to do so-and-so.
And it's completely sort of ridiculous. I think
it's a part of sort of Parkinson's law here that
that this is the way in which a bureaucracy
functions. It tends to generate work for itself,
and this is exactly what I can see is happening in
Washington, that if you can have 100 projects
under your guidance rather than 10, you've got
that much more paper and you justify the many more
positions and so on. But this, plus the fact that
there are many, many more sort of bookkeeping
requirements these days than there used to be,
really makes it a major sort of problem, I think,
from the administrative point of view, to do these
things. The problem, I think, is sort of being
compounded recently by the fact that they've got
into this multi-institutional
pattern here. And I haven't had any direct part of
any of these things, but I don't know how they
managed to do those things and keep them going. But
even the Sea Grant program was originally thought
of as a sort of block funding type thing, and even
there they, without any kind of appropriate
authorization from Congress or anything, they
went off in the same direction of breaking things
down into ridiculously small things. And there's
all the paperwork involved with this, as well as
the lack of flexibility. The other thing that's
been happening here is the fact that you're
committed to making plans longer and longer in
advance that you want any kind of major support
these days. You've probably got a plan about three
years ahead and hard to get it. The result is by the
time this third year's rolled around, you have
absolutely no flexibility. As things have
changed or something, you're kind of stuck with
things. So, the planning's fine, but it
certainly, you lose any kind of choice in things.
A lot of the problems that have come from the
combination of inflation and reduced funding and
so on, all have really been most critical since I
stepped aside as chairman of the department. And I
thought I was leaving everything and looked rosy
at the time that I decided that I would step down as
chairman. And I couldn't, in a sense, I probably
couldn't have chosen a better time. But I
certainly had no anticipation of what was going to
happen. What about the division of agencies,
which you mentioned earlier? Let me sketch
something for you. ONR becomes more
mission-oriented as it advances upward after
World War II, let's say particularly after 1949,
and you begin to have the rise of NSF and other
scientific agencies to administer
oceanography. Was this essentially a good thing?
I think it was for probably many different sort of
reasons. But ONR was obviously strictly a Navy
type thing, although in the early days they
certainly interpreted their responsibilities
very broadly, I think, relatively speaking. But
there were areas that they were sort of not
touching at all. But essentially, at least my
interpretation is that sort of out of the ONR model
came this idea for NSF. And NSF was set up, as I
recall, in 1951. Let's see, the first director was
moved over from ONR, remember, wasn't it?
Waterman.
But the general situation was that ONR would
continue to support oceanography. NSF would get
into, essentially, other fields. And NSF really
didn't get into oceanography to any, I think I'm
right in saying, any kind of significant extent
until the IGYK program came along, which was
actually in what was it, 57, 58, but where the
funding must have predated that by a year or so. And
I think NSF picked that up because, well, it was not
just oceanography. There were many other
aspects, but it would not have been appropriate
for ONR to have gone into all of these other fields
besides oceanography, certainly some of them. So
this is really what moved NSF into the picture, and
they've essentially never been out of it since.
And the
sort of drift of things has been such that we've
been told various times, well, NSF's going to pick
up more and more of this.
I don't know quite what has happened. ONR seemed to
be sort of going down in level of support as far as
they were concerned here. But now I hear that maybe
they're coming up again and so on. What has been
difficult is for us, and we're not alone in this, is
how do you sort of deal with ONR, NSF, AEC, which no
longer exists under that name, but how do you keep
some sort of a... of balance or whatever with these
different agencies. And very often, I feel that we
have been in the position of kind of divide and
conquer, that where all the money and so forth
existed in Washington, they were the ones who got
together and decided, well, we'll support this
institution to such and such a level. We're put in
the position of asking people for, in a sense,
overlapping kind of support. I don't think this is
actually done. But I mean, you never know quite
what's going to come out of these things. So I think
it's been kind of a scary game here.
AEC turned out to be a fairly substantial
supporter for our work here, and entirely on sort
of environmental studies, although they were
related to essentially radioactive materials
that might get into the Columbia River and so on. So
that was of concern to them, but they were a kind of
major supporter here. It seems almost to an
outsider that it's as if oceanographers looked at
what the government wanted and planned a research
topic they might get funded, rather than moving
out and directing research to what interested
them. Is that a...? I think so, and of course
there's always the kind of argument here about
freedom of research and so forth, And I think all of
the agencies have made
quite a conscious effort to play fair on this
thing, but the fact is that they do influence you a
good deal, not by telling you what to do, but by
refusing to support things that they didn't want
to do. So things do become very much sort of
controlled in this way, and exceedingly
difficult to get sort of new things started, and
particularly to get sort of younger men started
and so on here.
So I think that it reached a point where there was a
sort of undesirable
amount of control over what goes on. Sure, you do
things where the money is. Now, we've chosen in a
few cases not to go where the money was. We didn't
participate at all in this Indian Ocean
expedition by choice. We were asked at one time if
we wanted to get involved in a lot of the Antarctic
operations and we said no thank you, we didn't want
to.
I guess here have operated a little bit more on a
sort of an individual basis and have not
participated maybe as much in some of these
multi-institutional programs that have been
coming along here in recent years. Some of the
individuals have. They've participated and gone
on and so on. Now, we did get quite involved here for
several years as part of the international,
what's it called, international biological
program on this upwelling program. But we've more
or less operated
more by ourselves. Is this because of the
undergraduate emphasis here? No, I don't think
one could say that, although the
good many of the faculty are involved in teaching
either at undergraduate or graduate level, which
means that they're not entirely free to go off for
long periods without making appropriate sort of
adjustments and reallocations.
No, I think it's more sort of individual choices. I
may be overemphasizing this in a way, but one
thing that I sort of fought against for a number of
years was getting involved in general
set of marine geophysics is refraction and
reflection, seismic shooting and so on, which
involved carrying explosives and was in a sense
kind of hazardous thing. And I said, I didn't think
we ought to get into that. There were two or three
institutions that were heavily involved in it.
Why did we have to get into it? Well, lo and behold,
some money came along, and we were doing it. And we
no sooner got started on it than ONR cut off the
support. So we were probably being well advised,
you know, never to get really sort of committed to
that thing. And I think there have been some,
probably some similar sort of things.
So it's,
I think if one took a really sort of objective view
of things, one would find that the
programs in this country are pretty much sort of
what the federal government agencies want them to
be. There's very little sort of independence here
now. they can always turn around and say that
anybody who wants to can submit a proposal on
anything they think they want to do, and that if
something isn't going on, it's because nobody's
interested in doing the work, so they kind of stuck
on this. But I, just as for fun here several years
ago, I dreamed up a rhetorical question. I asked
Professor Rattray whether I could have the
Thompson for a couple of weeks. And he said, what do
you want the Thompson for? And I said, oh, I'm not
going to tell you, but I got an idea that I want to
test. Can I have the ship for a couple of weeks? And
he thought for a while, and he said, well, he
guessed I could. It would require some
telephoning to Washington to get some funds
reallocated and so on. But if I really had a good
thing, I could probably get the ship. And I said,
what about some people help me?" And he said, oh,
no, no people. Everybody's committed, you see, to
other programs. So I had, this was just a
hypothetical question, but it indicates how tied
up you are with the system in a way. We had a uh we've
mentioned it at lunchtime here we had this drought
situation this year and it was more than just a
local drought something very unusual has been
happening out in the north